---
layout: post
title:  "SERMON - A Light For The Nations - 23rd June 2024 - Dumfries Free Church of Scotland"
date:   2024-06-23 11:30:07
categories: jekyll update
excerpt_separator: <!-- excerpt-end -->
---

Click below to listen to the sermon being preached:
<audio controls>
<source src="/media/light.mp3" type="audio/mpeg">
Your browser does not support the audio element.
</audio>

*Apologies that the first few minutes were not recorded*

# Sermon: A Light For The Nations

This Lord’s Day we are exploring Isaiah 49, a prophecy formed of a
number of distinct parts. <!-- excerpt-start -->This morning we will be considering parts one
and two – the people of Israel’s disbelief and rejection of God, and
God’s gracious love to the Gentiles<!-- excerpt-end --> - and this evening we’ll consider
parts three to five. I hope that, by the end, we will see how this
prophecy came to be fulfilled both in the Lord Jesus and also in the
Church He left to follow Him.

## The People of Israel’s Disbelief and Rejection of God

So what have we just heard? Turn with me, if you will, to Isaiah 49, and
follow along as we explore the text. This text begins with the words
“Listen to me, O coastlands, and give attention, you peoples from afar”
(v1), showing us immediately that (unlike some of the other prophecies
in Isaiah), this message is for not just the people of Israel, but the
peoples of the world. Compare it, if you will, with Isaiah 40, “Comfort,
comfort **my people**, says the Lord” (Isaiah 40. 1). This prophecy
follows in a line of prophecies concerning the restoration of their
kingdom, beginning with Isaiah 45’s declaration that, post exile, the
nation of Israel would be rebuilt by Cyrus’ decree.

The first important thing to understand, as we read this text, is that
it is spoken primarily by the Lord Jesus Christ. Now I am often
uncomfortable about reading Jesus into Bible texts, as I am not
convinced that He can be found in all of them, but there are some texts
where it is clear that it was the Lord Jesus and He alone who was the
intended subject. As we continue through this study I hope you will
conclude the same as I do. Of course, as a prophecy it was written many
centuries before Jesus was born, so wasn’t spoken by the man Christ
Jesus, but was instead used by God, through Isaiah, to show us what the
Lord would be like.

In this prophecy, Jesus declares that He was born for this purpose: “The
Lord called me from the womb” (v1b). It is as though the Lord was
saying, “Before I came out of the womb, God had determined that I should
hold this office.”[^1] The fulfilment of this prophecy was why Jesus was
here. Furthermore, it was not something that was thrust upon Him when He
grew up – the fulfilment of the prophecy was central to His incarnation.
Before even He was born, He was set apart. We can see another example of
this earlier in the Old Testament, where Elkanah and Hannah had a son,
Samuel. In 1 Samuel 1. 11, the barren Hannah made a tearful vow to the
Lord as she prayed in the Temple, promising that if God gave her a son,
she would give the son back to Him as a thank-offering. “I will give him
to the Lord all the days of his life, and no razor shall touch his
head.” (1 Sam. 1. 1).

Therefore, once the child was born and weaned, she and her husband
presented Samuel at the Temple, to minister “before the Lord, a boy
clothed in a linen ephod.” (1 Sam 2. 18). This was no rash decision: she
did not see the child and decide it should be given to God. Samuel did
not grow up and decide to candidate for Temple ministry. It was
pre-decided before his birth. This is nothing new to us, for as
Christians we are all too aware of the doctrine of Predestination: that
God decided before the foundation of the world those to whom He would
reveal Himself and those to whom He wouldn’t. We can see this in the
Confession of Faith:

> *All those whom God hath **predestinated** unto life, and those only,
> He is pleased, in His appointed and accepted time, effectually to
> call, by His Word and Spirit, out of that state of sin and death in
> which they are by nature, to grace and salvation by Jesus Christ.*[^2]

Not only was Christ born for this purpose, but as we continue in the
passage we can see that God “made \[Jesus’\] mouth like a sharp sword”
(v2). Jesus’ weapons, in accomplishing His purposes, were not the
traditional weapons used to subjugate a kingdom or impose your will on a
people, but were instead “the truth of His Word”.[^3] We can see similar
imagery in the Book of Revelation, where Jesus returns upon a white
horse to judge the nations. Turn with me to Revelation 19: at verse 15
we can read that “from His mouth comes a sharp sword with which to
strike down the nations.” Furthermore, returning to Isaiah 49, we can
see that Jesus compares Himself to “a polished arrow” (v2b). The fact
that Jesus uses both ‘sword’ and ‘arrow’ to describe Himself shows that
his weapon (the Gospel, the Word of God) is useful both in hand-to-hand
close combat, and also as a long distance weapon. This is how His
message is not just for those of the nation of Israel, but for those
“peoples from afar” (v1).

Having described Himself as a sword and as a polished arrow, Jesus
declares that “in His quiver \[God\] hid Me away” (v2b). Turn with me to
Luke 2. 52, where we find the immortal words, “And Jesus increased in
wisdom and in stature, and in favour with God and man.” This is the only
insight that we have into Jesus’ childhood and young-adulthood. There is
no account of His teenage years, nor His education in the Temple, nor
His plying a trade in His step-father’s workshop. In many ways we could
consider those years between Christ’s infancy (with the one exception of
the boy Christ in the Temple – 2. 41-51) as (in the words of David
Guzik) the “hidden years of Jesus, when He lived in obscurity, as a
polished shaft waiting \[to be used\] in the quiver of the Lord.”[^4] We
don’t know what Jesus did in that time, but we do know that the Lord God
kept Him safe (at a time when so many died in infancy and childhood)
until such a time as His ministry began.

Returning to Isaiah, we now hear another voice in the prophecy. Until
now the voice has been that of Jesus, but in v3 we hear the Lord God
(God the Father) speaking: “You are my servant, Israel, in whom I will
be glorified.” Now, this verse has caused much debate among Biblical
scholars over the centuries. Some people say that, in calling the
servant ‘Israel’, it suggests that it is not Jesus that the prophecy
refers to, but rather the Jews, God’s OT chosen people. In many ways
this would be an understandable conclusion to reach. After all, it was
written for the Jews in a time of exile, when they needed hope and
restoration. However, vv5-6 would imply that this servant (named Israel)
has a mission to restore Israel to the Father: “to bring Jacob back to
Him” (v5). Therefore many readers, Guzik and Calvin included, believe
“the view that Israel is a title of the individual messianic Servant
harmonizes most satisfactorily with the passage and context.”[^5]

However we cannot escape the fact that the prophecy names the Servant of
God as Israel. What do we know of the name Israel? In Genesis 22 we see
that Jacob is renamed Israel by God, and we know that the Jews as a
people become known as Israel. Therefore we can conclude that the name
Israel can be applied to an individual and to a people without any
issue.

In saying, of Jesus, “You are my servant, Israel” (v3), God the Father
is showing that this prophecy applies not just to Jesus, but also to His
people (the Church, you and me). This should not surprise us, for we
know that the Church (and by Church we do of course mean the family of
the elect, not the building) is the ‘bride of Christ’. Calvin explains
this: “In a word, the Lord honours by this name the Church, which is the
spouse of Christ, just as the wife is honoured by bearing the name and
title of her husband.”[^6] I suppose you could think this through by
saying that my surname is Topple, but in describing my wife and me you
could legitimately say ‘The Topples’. Similarly Jesus’ name is Christ,
and His people are Christ-ians. At this time, of course, the name
‘Christ’ was not known, nor was Jesus, so it is unsurprising that God
didn’t use those names. So He described both the servant, His Son the
Messiah, and the people who live in and through Him, in the one word:
God’s chosen people, Israel.

Yet this nation (the Church) is “the true embodiment of what the nation
\[of Israel\] failed to be, namely, “the one in whom I will be
glorified”.”[^7] We know from the Old Testament that, time and time
again, the people of Israel refused to walk in the Lord’s ways. Time
after time they turned aside from His righteous judgements and decrees
and went after their own wills. God may have chosen the people, but the
people rarely chose God, apart from when they needed help. This servant,
spoken of in Isaiah 49, and the people incorporated into Him, will be
different. In Christ, God is glorified. In the Church, God is glorified.

Yet the image is not one of undiluted joy. Having named the Servant as
Israel, and shown how, through Him, the people would give Him glory (49.
3), the Servant cries out in complaint, “I have laboured in vain; I have
spent my strength for nothing and vanity”! Dear friends, I dare say you
and I have known that feeling from time to time, as our attempts to
share the Gospel with someone have fallen flat on their face, when the
Church building develops a leaky roof or faulty electrics, when a
promising convert backslides and returns not again. At times like those,
the temptation is to cry out to God, ‘Why?’

This cry, “I have laboured in vain” is the cry of the Church,
incorporate in the Servant. It could so easily have been the cry of
Jesus Himself, were it not for the fact that He had the kind of
unhindered relationship with God the Father that such cries were not
necessary. However, as Christians is it important that we remember that,
although our labours in the Gospel may appear fruitless “the fruit... is
not always visible to the eyes of men”.[^8] None of us can see how the
Lord is working in the hearts of the un-generate, in the process of
regeneration. And yet, we can see the result once He’s finished His
work. In that inbetween period, however, when we can see no results from
our labour, it is tempting to give up, but the Servant in the prophecy
does not turn away from God “in cynical unbelief”, so nor should we.[^9]
Calvin echoes this thought in summing up the phrase:

> *Though my labour be unprofitable, and though I have almost exhausted
> my strength without doing any good, yet it is enough that God approves
> of my obedience.*[^10]

Having considered that the nation of Israel is not the sum total of
God’s people, that is, not the only nation that God is interested in, it
is important for us to note that it does have “an enduring place in
God’s plan”.[^11] We can see this from v5: “And now the Lord says, He
who formed me from the womb to be His servant, to bring Jacob back to
Him.” This way of thinking is found in the New Testament as well, where
Paul declares:

> *And in this way all Israel will be saved, as it is written,*
>
> *“The Deliverer will come from Zion,*
>
> *He will banish ungodliness from Jacob”;*
>
> *“and this will be my covenant with them*
>
> *when I take away their sins.” (Rom. 11. 26-27)*

## God’s Gracious Love to the Gentiles

Isaiah 49. 5 is linked closely with v6, where we can read:

> *It is too light a thing that you should be my servant to raise up the
> tribes of Jacob and to bring back the preserved of Israel. I will make
> you as **a light for the nations**, that my salvation may reach to the
> end of the earth.* (v6)

The Lord Jesus Christ has a twin purpose, says Isaiah. First of all, He
will restore Jacob, that is, the people of Israel to God. God’s chosen
people will, once again, choose the Lord and be in covenant with Him,
but also **Jesus will unite the nations of the earth into the covenant
as well**. Jesus is too great, His power too infinite, and God’s love
for mankind is too strong, “to redeem only… ethnic Israel”.[^12] Instead
He “has a calling to serve Israel and beyond.”[^13]

We, of course, are the beneficiaries of this Good News. For we (and I
admit I am making an assumption here) are not Jewish converts to
Christianity. We instead were born to Gentile, that is, non Jewish,
parents. We did not undergo the rites and ceremonies of Judaism before
pronouncing faith. We are, therefore, Gentile converts to Christianity.
If it wasn’t for Jesus being “a light for the nations” (v6), we could
not be incorporated into God’s salvation plan. This prophecy is
fulfilled in the words of Simeon: “For my eyes have seen Your salvation
that you have prepared in the presence of all peoples, a light of
revelation to the Gentiles, and for glory to Your people Israel.” (Luke
2. 30-32), and is quoted by Paul (Acts 13. 47).

This is why, in God, “there is no distinction between Jew and Greek; for
the same Lord is Lord of all” (Romans 10. 12).

However, having considered this, the scene turns darker:

> *Thus says the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel and His Holy One, to one
> deeply despised, abhorred by the nation, the servant of rulers:*
>
> *Kings shall see and arise; princes, and they shall prostrate
> themselves; because of the Lord, who is faithful, the Holy One of
> Israel, who has chosen you. (Isaiah 49. 7)*

Here the Lord God (‘*Thus says the Lord*’) is speaking directly to Jesus
and His Church (‘*to one deeply despised, abhorred by the nation, the
servant of rulers*’), warning of the horrible times to come. We know
from the life of Jesus how much He suffered for the Gospel, for our
salvation. We know from the lives of Christian martyrs down through the
centuries the lengths that mankind will go to in order to expunge
Christianity from the face of the earth. We may know rejection in the
world today, as more and more our land, once known as ‘The Land of the
Book’ turns away from God and His righteous decrees, but One who knew
rejection and pain to a far greater degree was the Lord Jesus, on whose
shoulders were the governments of the world (Isa. 9. 6).

However, the prophecy continues by declaring that the darkness will not
last for ever: “Because of the Lord” (7b), the peoples will one day
realise that the suffering and patient endurance of the Jesus, of whom
the prophet speaks, was actually a sign of great strength. “The most
exalted princes of the world”, says Calvin (and, we can take from this,
those beneath them) “shall be aroused to perceive that the restoration
of the nation is an illustrious work of God, and worthy of
reverence.”[^14]

Then, turning to verses 8 to 12, we see clearly how Jesus relates to us.
By referring to the Servant as “a covenant to the people”, we can know
for certain that the Servant subject of Isaiah 49 is the Lord Jesus;
“for He has been appointed to be the Mediator of the covenant, because
the Jews by their sins has revolted from God, who had made an
everlasting covenant with them.”[^15]

In the letter to the Hebrews we see this spelled out for us:

> *But you have come to Mount Zion and to the city of the living God,
> the heavenly Jerusalem, and to innumerable angels in festal
> gathering,… and to Jesus, the mediator of the new covenant, and to the
> sprinkled blood that speaks a better word than the blood of Abel.
> (Hebrews 12. 22, 24)*

The blood that Jesus shed for us, you and me, on the cross of Calvary,
is the sign of the covenant. And where the blood of Abel cried out to
the Lord in Genesis (4. 10), so too the spilled blood of Jesus calls out
to the Lord. And this covenant is a promise: God will “establish the
land” (8b), He will say “to the prisoners, ‘Come out’”, and “they shall
not hunger or thirst”. These are promises.

We know, of course, how Jesus (in His ministry) fulfilled many of these
promises. In Mark 5(. 1-15) we see how “Jesus set the demon possessed
free from the bondage of chains and demonic torture”,[^16] while in Luke
13(. 16) we see how Jesus healed the sick and diseased, setting them
free from the bondage of their sickness. In Ephesians (4. 8) we see how
Jesus rescued the righteous from Hades (hell) and restored them to
heaven, and in John 8(. 33-36) and Galatians (3. 22-23) see how those
who are in bondage to sin and the law are set free by Jesus and Him
alone. Remember the call:

> *Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give
> you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and
> lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. (Matt. 11. 28,
> KJV)*

This freedom, friends, is the promise of Jesus; and here, thousands of
years ago, and many centuries before His birth, we see it foretold!

So what? We have studied the first half of this text, and there may be
some here who are not sure why I’ve taken us down this path. What can we
learn from this? Well, we can know for certain that, while Jesus Himself
acknowledged that His first priority was to “the lost sheep of the house
of Israel” (Matt. 15. 24), Jesus’ message is for all peoples and
nations, including Dumfries! Jesus conquered sin not by might or
physical strength, but by His Word, releasing people from burdens and
imprisonments to sin as He did so. This is His offer today: are you sick
or burdened? Are you in bondage to sin or the law?

Friends: be encouraged!

In verse 4 we saw how easy it is, when we feel that our labours are not
bearing fruit, to give up. It is so easy to lose courage in the midst of
our endeavours. “Christ exhorts and encourages godly teachers \[and,
indeed, every Christian\] to strive earnestly till they rise victorious
over this temptation”.[^17]

Furthermore, we can take v6 as a promise in our lives: don’t forget that
while the prophecy is speaking of the Lord Jesus, it is speaking also of
His Church. That is you and me, brothers and sisters. Therefore where we
read of Christ’s work in raising “up the tribes of Jacob… as a light for
the nations, that \[God’s\] salvation may reach to the end of the earth”
(v6), we can take heart that this involves you and me too! However
fruitful or fruitless we feel that our endeavours have been as a Church,
we can know for certain that “the Lord will cause some fruit to spring
from \[the labour of Christ and the Church\] contrary to the
expectations of men.”[^18]

Dear friends, hundreds of years before His birth, Christ’s ministry and
purpose was set out through the Prophet Isaiah. In His life, Christ
fulfilled all of this, and in so doing has won for us everlasting life
through His blood. We can take encouragement from this, seeing that He
is the covenant by which we are saved, and we can also be encouraged
that the Church, in His Name, is part of God’s gracious plan to not only
bring His chosen people (Israel) to faith in Christ, but also to spread
the light of His Gospel to the ends of the earth.

Let us pray:

Grant, O God, that these lessons from Your Word may abide in our hearts
and minds, and bring forth fruit in our lives. Increase in us faith,
hope and love, with a careful keeping of Your commandments, that we may
be constant in our obedience; And grant, O merciful Father, that our
life’s labours ended we may find welcome and rest in the home eternal
where Your redeemed ever live to glorify You. We ask this, with all our
prayers, through Jesus Christ our Lord. <span
class="smallcaps">Amen</span>

[^1]: Jean Calvin, *Isaiah 33 - 66*, vol. 8, Commentaries (Grand Rapids,
    Mich.: Baker Book House, 1981), 9.

[^2]: Westminster Divines, ‘The Westminster Confession of Faith’, in
    *The Confession of Faith* (Edinburgh and London: William Blackwood
    and Sons Ltd., 1969), chap. 10.

[^3]: Lane T. Dennis, Wayne Grudem, and J. I. Packer, eds., *ESV Study
    Bible, Personal Size*, First Edition (Crossway, 2015), 1330.

[^4]: David Guzik, ‘Isaiah 49’, accessed 18 June 2024,
    https://enduringword.com/bible-commentary/isaiah-49/.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Calvin, *Isaiah 33 - 66*, 8:11.

[^7]: Dennis, Grudem, and Packer, *ESV Study Bible, Personal Size*,
    1033.

[^8]: Calvin, *Isaiah 33 - 66*, 8:12.

[^9]: Dennis, Grudem, and Packer, *ESV Study Bible, Personal Size*,
    1033.

[^10]: Calvin, *Isaiah 33 - 66*, 8:13.

[^11]: Guzik, ‘Isaiah 49’.

[^12]: Dennis, Grudem, and Packer, *ESV Study Bible, Personal Size*,
    1330.

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: Calvin, *Isaiah 33 - 66*, 8:20.

[^15]: Ibid., 8:24.

[^16]: Guzik, ‘Isaiah 49’.

[^17]: Calvin, *Isaiah 33 - 66*, 8:13.

[^18]: Ibid., 8:17.
